okay so life in the clouds of venus
and this follows up on the announcement
uh just a couple of months ago
of the idea that a detection had been
made
of a biosignature of a gas in venus's
atmosphere
a gas called phosphine which is a very
unusual
uh chemical which we'll talk more about
as we go through
and we'll talk about how that was made
how that detection was made
and also about why we think
it's got some sort of biological origin
um very interesting papers on the
subject which i've read and researched
and also there's a couple of videos that
you can watch
on youtube by the original authors
being interviewed so there are some
people from cambridge from the ioa dr
paul rimmer and sarah sager you may
remember she's
been and given talks to us at the ioa
before now
and jane greaves is a visiting professor
at cambridge as well was involved so
a lot of cambridge involvement in this
one
so life in the clouds of venus well
first of all this is a lovely picture of
uh
venus our neighboring planet and uh
nearly the twin of the earth in terms of
size and mass
i think the earth is about 8 000 miles
in diameter
and venus is just about 200 miles less
so almost an insignificant difference
and this lovely picture of the uh the
clouds with that classic v
shape that you tend to see on the clouds
of venus
another picture of it here taken with a
different camera from
up close uh one of the orbiters took
this one
so as i said about the same size as the
earth little bits
less diameter and therefore a bit less
massive as well
but crucially it's closer to the sun and
being closer to the sun we'd expect it
to be hotter
well the question is how much hotter and
i get my gcse students to work this one
out for me
it's 70 percent of the distance we say
the earth is at one astronomical unit
venus is at 0.7
so by the inverse square law we can
multiply
0.7 by itself and get 0.49
which i'm going to call a half
and so the inverse nature of that means
it really receives
twice the heat that we do it's a very
neat calculation
but that doesn't mean we should expect
it to be double the temperature
because temperature goes with the fourth
power of the heat
and so actually the increase in
temperature would be expected to be
the ratio of the fourth root of two
which my calculator tells me is 1.2
approximately and so we'd expect a 20
increase in the temperature now you've
got to work in in kelvins in absolute
temperature
and the earth is about 20 degrees c
which is
293 kelvin and so
working that out you should expect venus
to be
about 384 degrees kelvin which is 75
degrees c which is certainly
pretty hot getting on the way to boiling
point of water
but in fact it's much hotter than that
as we shall see
and the reason of course is because it's
suffering from the greenhouse effect
of its atmosphere it's a very thick
atmosphere
90 times the density of our own
and what's more 95 of that thick soupy
atmosphere
is made of carbon dioxide which we're
all very worried about here on earth
from the point of view of it's uh giving
too much of a greenhouse effect so this
huge amount of it and the fact that it's
co2
means it traps a vast amount of heat and
the surface temperature is actually
raised
not to where we calculated it to be
at about 350 but actually more like 450
degrees
centigrade but
talking about that as just the surface
temperature doesn't really
tell you the whole story of what's going
on
what we really need to look at is how
the
atmosphere behaves from the surface
up through up to high altitude
and this is a chart of the temperature
in degrees kelvin at the bottom there on
the surface so
it's 750 kelvin 450 degrees
c roughly but the temperature drops
according to this blue line
quite quickly reaches a minimum and then
starts to get hotter again and the
reason for that
is as the gas gets thinner and there is
less to protect
it from the direct radiation of the sun
it starts to be
warmed the middle layers are blocked by
the slightly higher layers being hazy
and so they are at a lower temperature
and then
of course you get down into the thick
layers where the greenhouse effect
kicks off and causes that runaway
heating
and as in the graphic here there's a
thick layer of cloud
down in the mid layers of the atmosphere
now the altitudes there are in
kilometers and
on earth we call a hundred kilometers
the karman line
which is where you have to fly to to get
your astronaut badge
now of course venus's atmosphere being
much thicker
extends to much higher altitudes at
worthwhile
pressures and so it's uh we have to go
much further up
really before we uh get to anything that
approaches that of a vacuum
now i've talked about the greenhouse
effect here on earth
we get warmed by it at
the rays of the sun both long and short
wave
so visible and infrared come into the
atmosphere
and some of the infrared can't then get
out because it's trapped
by the gases in the in the air
and particularly effective gases are
water vapor
h2o in the atmosphere
methane ch4 and carbon dioxide
and between them the three gases that we
have in our atmosphere
are keeping the earth warmer than it
would otherwise be
based on that heat calculation that we
were looking at earlier you could work
out the temperature you'd expect the
earth to be
and it would be about 20 degrees c lower
than it is now if it wasn't for the
greenhouse effect
so it's a good job we've got one the
problem
is that we're adding to it and we really
don't want to make it get any hotter
now if you look at the sort of
comparison between the two
planets atmospheres the same sort of
processes are going on
we've both got incoming sunlight and
reflected sunlight
and a lot of that uh is bounced away
especially by the reflective clouds of
venus
but the infrared light tends to be able
to penetrate through the clouds
warms up the ground and then can't get
back out
again at even longer wavelengths as it's
the same process
but just magnified
so we don't really want that to happen
to us
and for the whole thing to run away if
we add too much
to our greenhouse effect we could suffer
the same fate as venus
um if we're rather careless with our
planet
well that's another story what it does
point to though
is that in the deep past by which i mean
perhaps two billion years ago it was
quite likely that venus looked a lot
like the earth with
substantial amounts of liquid water and
a sort of much more uh pleasant aspect
to it it would have been quite warm it
would have been a minimum of the sort of
temperature we calculated 70 degrees c
but nevertheless not reached boiling
point
but what happened was that gradually
volcanoes gave out too much carbon
dioxide
and a runaway greenhouse was triggered
the water then evaporates from the
oceans into the atmosphere
and water is actually an even better
greenhouse gas
than carbon dioxide is so once the water
is in the atmosphere the temperature
goes skyrocketing
and everything gets completely out of
control
that's then followed by another process
which actually dehydrates the planet
and the reason
for the dehydration is that venus spins
very slowly
on its axis it actually takes 245
earth days for venus to rotate once
and as a consequence there's not
enough of a dynamo effect inside the
planet
to generate a worthwhile magnetic field
it has a very very weak
magnetic field compared to that of the
earth
that lets the solar wind in and of
course the solar winds even stronger
at venus than it is at the earth so it's
a double whammy
and what happens with the solar wind is
that it
takes apart the h2o molecules in the
atmosphere leaving the oxygen behind
and the hydrogen then escapes to space
being very light it can be torn away and
blasted off
into space never to return
and so gradually the amount of hydrogen
in the composition of the atmosphere is
depleted
and a lot more oxygen is left behind
so what about the weather on venus then
down in that low part of the atmosphere
below beneath the clouds
well it rains there
mostly rain's 95 pure
sulfuric acid that's a consequence of
the
amount of water that's left mixing with
sulfur dioxide and spare oxygen
from uh the depletion process
and the sulfur dioxide from the
volcanoes
to make h2so4 sulfuric acid battery acid
as we use
in lead acid batteries and so it rains
droplets of pure almost pure sulfuric
acid
out of the clouds at around about 30
kilometers altitude
but that never reaches the ground
because as the
raindrops fall down towards the ground
they uh get hotter and hotter remember
that temperature is going up all the
time as you
get nearer the surface and so if
in fact the raindrops of sulfuric acid
boil away back to vapor
before they make it to the ground so
it doesn't really rain on the surface
now another surprising discovery was the
appearance of
snow on the mountain tops there's a
picture here
it's actually a composite picture of
different wavelengths involving radar
showing snow on the peaks of the
mountain tops
on venus but this snow is not made
of water ice snow that we would
use and throw snowballs at each other
with it's actually made of a ghastly
mixture of heavy metal compounds
involving
lead bismuth and tellurium combined with
sulfur so things like
bismuth sulfide and pure tellurium and
other things
snow out onto the mountain tops and this
was discovered by these two
people here professor bruce fegli and
laura schaefer who were standing there
talking about
a meteorite in fact but nevertheless
they discovered that it does snow this
ghastly heavy metals
so um not somewhere to book your skiing
holiday there either
now we've had a number of probes that
have been sent to
venus to inspect it the americans have
sent one or two flybys
but it's the soviet russia that
really led the way in exploring
venus with a whole series of probes and
this is just one of them the soviet
vega one probe this is just a model
here but it's uh
was on its way to visit halley's comets
in 1985
and it carried with it a large
deployable balloon
which could be dropped into the
atmosphere and measure the atmosphere as
the balloon gradually descended
but as with all probes it
was eventually doomed to be destroyed by
the hellish conditions
here's a few of the pictures that we
have of the surface of venus
taken by the soviet uh landers
the venera probes uh one through
thirteen were all sent there
and just a few of them made it to the
ground and managed to take a few quick
snapshots
and you can see the uh rim of the
spacecraft here
or the lander with these armored teeth
around the outside of it
this thing is built out of battleship
technology
to survive the hundred atmospheres
pressure
and the temperature and being soaked in
battery acid on the way down
these things here these strange
horseshoe arrangements these are
actually the lens cap from the camera
that's been ejected
and then this was a sampling arm that
deployed
outwards to try to sample some of the
rock but really those are the only
photographs that we have
of the surface directly and that we've
had these
for probably 30 years now
since they were first produced early
ones were in black and white these are
just a few that are in color
and it shows that barren rocky surface
i think the record was about 35 minutes
for
um a probe being on the surface of venus
before
ceasing to function
but the subject of this is not really
the hellish conditions
on the surface it goes more towards the
idea of
things in the atmosphere and
this goes all the way back to a proposal
by the great carl sagan
um very much a visionary
of all things astronomical and
along with harold morowitz he put a
paper out which was published in nature
so it was taken very very seriously
um and it talked about the possibility
of
life in the clouds of venus so he said
it's possible that life arose under
moderate conditions on the surface of
venus early in its history
as we were talking about but then as out
guessing that's the volcanoes
adding carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere
surface temperatures rose and the
surface became more inclement
that's a very mild world word for the
hellish conditions that there are now
but uh then he says organisms may then
have emigrated to the clouds
and there be awaiting the first
biological experiments to be performed
in the vicinity of venetian clouds
so in other words waiting for us to
discover them
and it said not an entirely crazy
suggestion because
when you look at the conditions
in that middle layer it's really still
quite a
dense um atmosphere it's around about
one
atmosphere of pressure up there at 60
kilometers
we would call you know that would be a
thin vacuum from our point of view at
that height
on earth but on venus the pressure has
just dropped to a much more moderate
level
and so very much a temperate zone
in that middle region and
some artists um impressions for you
of the sort of things that carl sagan's
um
ideas of this temperate zone led to
i'm not saying these are real but the
idea of some sort of uh
sky jellyfish floating around
with these huge balloon envelopes is the
sort of idea that astrobiologists have
considered
for some of these atmospheric regions
and maybe the creatures can
control their altitude by inflating or
deflating their
their balloon envelopes and changing
height
when they need to and so forth and this
idea has not only been
suggested for venus but it was also
suggested
for the planet jupiter and in fact
uh this particular piece of artwork is
representing the sky
jellyfish of jupiter which of course
we've got no evidence that they exist
but it's entirely plausible i suppose
and so the idea would be that perhaps
the clouds of venus
might look something like this
who knows we really haven't explored
and uh until we gain the knowledge then
it's anyone's guess but wouldn't it be
exciting to
actually have a photograph rather than
this lovely artist's drawing
showing something like this going on on
another planet
well for the purpose of this talk
we have to understand a little bit about
how they made the measurements
that led to the the paper and it's all
about
using sub millimeter astronomy what do i
mean by that well we have the
electromagnetic spectrum laid out here
from visible light in the middle around
about here
which is about the right size to be able
to just
see bacteria and single celled organisms
the wavelength of light
is about the same as the size of such
creatures you you
can't see very much detail in them but
you can just about tell that they're
there
because they're on the same order of
size as um
the wavelength go to longer wavelengths
the needle point is about the same size
as infrared
radiation and then down through
microwaves
through sort of the size of insects we
cook with
our microwave ovens the wavelengths 12
centimeters
and then down into the shortwave radio
about the size of a human
long wave radio down here and so
there are some wavelengths around about
one millimeter in length
somewhere in here just uh near the sort
of
short end of of this uh microwave region
that uh are the ones we're interested in
and of course
at the other end i should mention once
you go to shorter wavelengths
you get to the size of atoms and
molecules and even to the atomic nucleus
with ultraviolet x-ray and gamma rays
so we have a couple of space telescopes
that have been very interested
in these millimeter wavelength
radiations and there's swas
from 1998 and the herschel telescope in
swas was looking at
540 to 610 micrometers so
that's half a millimeter to
0.6 a millimeter and herschel
a wider range actually from somewhat
shorter wavelengths going further into
the infrared
but you can see they're wildly different
from the what the human eye can detect
in the visible there
and the herschel telescope was quite a
big one it had a three and a half meter
mirror
i think with one of the largest uh
mirrors to be deployed in space
um much being twice the size of hubble
and
um will only be exceeded once we get the
james webb telescope up there
and so apart from those satellites we've
had to try and do this uh
from the ground
and the problem with doing astronomy
from the ground is
being able to see through our own
atmosphere first of all
but you can see that there is a
convenient
gap here in the obscuration
of the uh incoming waves the visible
light makes it all the way to the ground
so does a lot of the radio there are
some gaps in the infrared but this
particular one this is the
millimeter band and perhaps uh at ground
level you lose
about 25 percent of the
radiation and that's just about
tolerable but of course you don't have
to build your
observatory at ground level you can
stick it on a high mountain
and get get up to a level which is
tolerable
all these other short wavelengths and
ultra long ones and most of this
infrared bit here don't get through at
all so
you need to go to space for that so if
we zoom in on that a little bit you can
see this
the sub millimeter gap um the
amount that gets through um
is uh definitely
worth looking at in this millimeter
range
one way of doing it is to put your
telescope receiving apparatus
on an airplane and this is safire the
americans have a
jumbo jet which is based down in new
zealand and flies over the pacific
and has this large telescope which can
do
a combination of infrared and
um sub millimeter observing
gets high enough up into the atmosphere
to be above
most of the annoying problems of the
millimeter waves being absorbed by water
in fact
and uh so gets us a great view
so it was these submillimeter waves that
were the subject of the detection
of the gases on venus in particular
phosphine
that caused all of the excitement and
there were two telescopes involved in it
the james clark maxwell
telescope and the alma array
in chile the alma array is at 5000
metres high
and in fact our speaker of yesterday
was talking about visiting it and
needing a doctor because of the thin
atmosphere
so it turns out that this particular gas
phosphine
has an absorption band that is
nicely placed in the millimeter
part of the spectrum corresponding to
1.123 millimeters
long and that's a specific and highly
tuned
um absorption feature in the spectrum
where
phosphine will pick up that energy and
it causes the molecule to spin around
it's a rotational uh transform band
of the molecule and then they were able
to detect
20 parts per billion of phosphine
in the atmosphere of venus which doesn't
sound like very much
but it's an awful lot more than there is
in the earth's atmosphere
now phosphine is ph3
it's the heavier equivalent if you like
of ammonia which is
nh3 nitrogen and three hydrogens
nitrogen is in the first row of the
periodic table a light element and
phosphorus is just below it in the same
group
so shares many of its chemical
properties
and of course ammonia is a little bit
like water
which is oh2 if you write it backwards
it's the next element along from
nitrogen goes from nitrogen to oxygen
along that row in the periodic table
the next heavier element combined with
as many hydrogens as you can stick to it
which for that group is two
and as with ammonia it won't do you any
good if you try and breathe it
in phosphine is incredibly poisonous and
really quite difficult
nasty stuff to work with but it's not
as reported by some of the press um
commonly used as a poison gas in warfare
i saw a report in the press they were
getting it confused with fosgene
which is a completely different uh
chemical and has the formula
uh cocl2 it's carbonyl chloride
to give it its chemical name so the
fosgene
is not the same as phosphine but that
confused some of the popular press
so i said it was discovered initially by
the james clark maxwell telescope
high up on hawaii looks pretty barren
looks like surface of mars really
doesn't it apart from the
observatory building in the middle there
and there are three telescopes here the
middle one
this big one is the james clark maxwell
which has a 15 meter diameter mirror and
is dedicated to this sub millimeter band
and then this is a smaller submillimeter
band
telescope belonging to caltech and
then the smithsonian have
another sub millimeter array over here
on the right of the picture so this is
definitely uh
where the sub millimeter action is on
hawaii
and this is the detection that they made
um you can see actually when scientists
talk about detecting something
we're looking at the spectrum it's quite
noisy and got quite a lot of bumps in
but there is a
distinct dip just here at the
exact point of interest that they were
looking for
and they've fitted a curve to it here to
show what the
ideal spectrum of phosphine would look
like
um and it looks quite good um that
peak in the ideal spectrum seems to
correspond
there's a slight uh extra bit of width
over on this side to this side maybe
but it looks pretty good
so having made that initial this uh
discovery they then
managed to get some telescope time on
the alma array the atacama large
millimeter array
in the chilean andes up at 5000 meters
even better instrument for doing the
same thing
lovely picture of it here with the large
and small magellanic clouds
in the sky those dwarf galaxies that
orbit the milky way
and lo and behold they got a very very
similar plot which is always a good
thing
it's confirming the result very nicely
but uh this detection of this peak
corresponding to phosphine in the
atmosphere
and so the idea then
is that perhaps there are
not sky whales or giant jellyfish
but bacteria living in the droplets
in the clouds in that 50 to 60 kilometer
altitude band and that maybe they are
producing this
phosphine gas and that perhaps they're
managing to survive then some of them
will probably get carried away
and destroyed high in the atmosphere or
baked by
falling down too low but a lot of them
might be
managing to eke out some sort of
existence
by circulating in the cloud layer inside
the droplets of sulfuric acid perhaps
a very wild environment really
but just before we go into the details
of why they think that might be the case
let's have a little look at phosphine on
earth
i've said it's ph3 so we've got the
the big phosphorus in the middle and
three hydrogens stuck to it so
if you had super sharp x-ray eyes that's
what you could see perhaps
and it's just an interesting chemical
it burns the moment you expose it to air
this has been made in the beaker on the
right there
and it's continually being made in
solution and then
as it gets into the
vapor stage as it comes out in little
bubbles
it's immediately bursting into flames
with the
reaction with the oxygen in the earth's
atmosphere
and so we have almost none of it in the
earth's atmosphere
at all because the oxygen just takes
care of it as soon as it's produced
and i've added there that there's a
heavier version of
it p2h4 which is even more unstable
and usually is what's responsible for
the automatic
ignition um the ph3 if made pure enough
can
it will react with oxygen but it needs a
spark
but you usually get some of the
diphosphine the p2h4 in there that
makes it trigger off
and a common source of it on earth
is actually the decay of organic matter
organic
chemistry makes quite a lot of use of
phosphorus it's in phosphates
um in our dna is reliant on phosphates
and
a lot of our energy handling processes
in biochemistry
make use of phosphates in the form of
things like atp
adenosine triphosphate absolutely vital
energy carrier inside
the body um
but the only place you're likely to see
it is
out in the woods after dark in the
swampy woodlands
we see sometimes these weird lights in
in the woods which uh were thought to be
the will of the wisp or the
jack-o'-lantern
various other names in other parts of
the world seen
everywhere these strange blue lights
and what's happening is that in under
the water
in the little rotten fetid ponds
you have organic matter that is decaying
in conditions where there is no oxygen
left
and it's producing a mixture of gases
methane
and phosphine and a little bit of that
diphosphene as well
and then that bubbles up to the surface
as marsh gas
and the diphosphene acts as a spark plug
and ignites the whole lot and you see
the blue color
of the burning methane but it's actually
the phosphine and its
analog diphosphene that are responsible
for it catching
light so if it was pure methane it
wouldn't happen it would just bubble up
and
mix into the atmosphere in fact the
amounts that we have
in the earth's atmosphere are about one
part in a trillion
um as opposed to 20 parts per billion
that they found
on venus now another source apart from
um the
will of the wisp which i'm actually
almost love to mention is that uh we get
a certain amount
of phosphine from penguin farts
uh penguins are quite good at producing
what we would say is
a phosphorous rich white organic
substance
and certainly coming with that they you
get quite a lot of
phosphorus hydride ph3 phosphine
and there was some research done on here
there
with these maps of where the penguins
are and where they found phosphorus and
also
where they found phosphate there in the
atmosphere
associated with the said product
well what about other planets why are we
so excited particularly about
uh venus we find phosphine in the
atmospheres of uh
both jupiter and saturn it's quite
common
well the reason you find it in such uh
giant uh planet atmospheres is because
they are so rich in hydrogen about three
quarters
of the planet's atmosphere is made of
hydrogen
and this means that the hydrogen is
willing to react with anything and
everything just to try and sort of
even things out chemically it's a very
highly reducing
atmosphere as we would say the opposite
of what we have on earth which is an
oxidizing atmosphere
with all that free oxygen that we have
and venus's atmosphere is also highly
oxidizing
because as you'll remember from the
early part of the talk
it lost most of its hydrogen out to
space
leaving the oxygen behind but these
giant planets are
the opposite they're highly rich in
hydrogen
and so it's no surprise that things like
sulfur turn up as the hydride sh2
and phosphorus turns up as ph3
so back to the uh the story of the paper
and
the phosphine in the atmosphere of venus
and this is a little bit of a
complicated chart here
but what it's really telling us is that
the chemists involved in the project
did a very very detailed uh chemical
model
of how the different
chemical species all the different types
of molecules that are involved
probably about 100 different chemical
molecules involved in all of this would
all react
together in a thousand different ways
and i'm not exaggerating it really is
that many
to produce either the destruction
of phosphine by oxidizing it back to
phosphate
or the formation of it and in the
left-hand
chart this is their estimate of how
phosphine would be formed
at different heights
in the red and the rate of destruction
of it
at different heights in the blue so you
can see that once you get above
60 kilometers it gets destroyed really
quite quickly
um uh but down here
it's got much longer lifetime
um and you can see actually this is a
logarithmic scale here with uh
an inverse 10 to the power of but
uh going from here to here
we're talking about a hundred million
times longer life in the atmosphere
and so if you combine the rate of
formation and the rate of destruction
together
you can get an estimate of how much you
would expect to find
as the equilibrium amount
and that's on the right hand chart and
this combined graph
looks like this this is the combined
level that you would expect according to
the height
so there's an
interesting peak in it around here in
that 50 kilometer 40 to 50 kilometers
there's quite an abundance of it higher
than that and it's destroyed almost
completely
and that's by the ultraviolet light
coming in from the sun
but this was certainly the region of
interest here
so it could be formed on the ground and
make its way up into this cloud layer
but the amount that they found is the
final line here
it's much more and again when i say much
more we're talking
for going from 10 to the power minus 15
to 10 to the minus eight so seven
orders of magnitude it's a factor of 10
million
times more of it than you would expect
um based on just the inorganic chemistry
of what was going on
and so the idea is that really they
can't account
for how much phosphine they actually
found by a factor of 10 million
unless there is an another source of it
and really the only one that they
haven't been able to rule out
is a biological source as we have uh on
the earth
so we have a lot of bacteria on the
earth
that produce other chemicals like
methane and uh
hydrogen cyanide and other things and
indeed phosphine it is in fact the gut
bacteria of those penguins
that are producing the phosphine so it's
not unheard of
and it certainly could account for it
now they're very cautious people as
scientists they said
it could be a biological source
um but they didn't absolutely go out and
say we found life on venus
although that's what the press
translated it into and i'm sure they
knew that was going to happen
now another paper has recently been
published
pouring cold water on the idea and
suggesting that
actually sulfur dioxide in the
atmosphere could be responsible for
the difference and
turns out it has an absorption band at
1.121
millimeters which is very very close to
the
1.123 millimeters of
the phosphine and they were suggesting
that this
was perhaps accounting for that 10
million fold
extra abundance of phosphine because it
was in fact
sulfur dioxide which we've always known
about
and that if they subtracted the known
amount of sulfur dioxide away then
it would um mean that the
grafts on the previous slide would all
line up and there would be no need for
any uh
guts bacteria shall we say
but just the other day
just to add a twist to all of this the
original authors
have hit back and saying they were aware
of this
sulfur dioxide line and that it only
applies to
a rare excited state of sulfur dioxide
where
an electron has been kicked into a
higher orbit
and that such things are very unstable
especially at atmospheric pressures of
um greater than one
such as are found in the cloud layers of
venus at the altitudes that they're
interested in
this is very much in the same way that
the aurora
on earth are formed by
um the excitation of molecules of oxygen
gives us that green color and that can
only
operate and only exist at very very high
altitudes because
it will bump into another molecule if
there are any around
and then won't give out the green light
well the same thing
is true here that at the pressures
concerned
the sulfur dioxide won't exist for very
long
in the uh excited state because it will
bump into another molecule
and ditch the extra energy without um
contributing to the spectrum at all
so we're back to maybe
the uh the phosphine is there and maybe
it's
got a biological origin so of course
what we're going to have to do
is go and take a sample and measure it
and this has got nasa very excited in
the idea of a return to venus mission
taking a high altitude balloon
and being able to drop a probe
down into the various layers of the
atmosphere
and spend a long time
studying the atmosphere at different
heights
and at different longitudes and
latitudes as the balloon
moves around and
there's got precedent for this the
russians tried it
but perhaps with modern technology now
we could build one that was going to
survive
and really get some very interesting
results indeed
and wouldn't it be nice to put a camera
on there i'm sure they will
and so that leads really to the
conclusion of this
and perhaps one day in the future
this artist's impression will be uh
possible
with a floating sky city it's got kind
of an
anchor hanging down into the lower
regions of
venus's atmosphere but the whole thing
is uh
pressurized to be able to float
through having that property of being
slightly lighter
than the surrounding super thick
atmosphere
and hang out in this temporal zone or
temperate zone
in the
mid altitudes of venus and act as a sort
of
space station or venus station
for uh scientists and uh study of the
planet
so perhaps one day in the distant future
such a thing will be possible
as a sort of outpost to do further
research from
and so i'll just bring that to an end
there and if you've got any questions
then
do let me know and i'll try and answer
them
there's a lot more detail behind the
analysis that
these people have done but uh thanks
very much for listening